(Small)

Context: This requirement is why scientists do not consider viruses living: they are not made of cells. To make new viruses, they have to invade and hijack the reproductive mechanism of a living cell

Target: virus

Question: Why are viruses not considered living?

Answer: They are not made of cells.

(Chpt 1.2 Blooms 3)

###

Context: Carbon-12 contains six protons, six neutrons, and six electrons; therefore, it has a mass number of 12 (six protons and six neutrons). Carbon-14 contains six protons, eight neutrons, and six electrons; its atomic mass is 14 (six protons and eight neutrons). These two alternate forms of carbon are isotopes.

Target: carbon-12

Question: How many neutrons do carbon-12 and carbon-13 have, respectively?

Answer: Carbon-12 contains  6  neutrons while carbon-13 contains  7  neutrons.

(Chpt 2.1 Blooms 2)

###

Context: Fats with at least one double bond between carbon atoms are unsaturated fats, they remain liquid (oil) at room temperature.In contrast to unsaturated fats, we call triglycerides without double bonds between carbon atoms saturated fats, meaning that they contain all the hydrogen atoms available. Saturated fats are a solid at room temperature and usually of animal origin.

Target: unsaturated fats

Question: Compare and contrast saturated and unsaturated fats.

Answer: Saturated fats contain double bonds and are liquids at room temperature, while unsaturated fats contain single bond and are solids at room temperature.

(Chpt 2.3 Blooms 4)

###

Context: Polymers break down into monomers during hydrolysis. A chemical reaction occurs when inserting a water molecule across the bond. Breaking a covalent bond with this water molecule in the compound achieves this. During these reactions, the polymer breaks into two components: one part gains a hydrogen atom (H+) and the other gains a hydroxyl molecule (OH–) from a split water molecule.

Target: hydrolysis

Question: The word hydrolysis is defined as the lysis of water. How does this apply to polymers?

Answer: Polymers break by separating water into hydrogen and hydroxyl group that are added to the monomers.

(Chpt 3.1 Blooms 3)

###

Context: Dehydration and hydrolysis reactions are catalyzed, or “sped up,” by specific enzymes; dehydration reactions involve the formation of new bonds, requiring energy, while hydrolysis reactions break bonds and release energy.

Target: hydrolysis

Question: How can energy be supplied to chemical reactions in living systems?

Answer: hydrolysis

(Chpt 3.1 Blooms 2)

###

Context: Biological macromolecules are organic, meaning they contain carbon. In addition, they may contain hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and additional minor elements.

Target: macromolecules

Question: Why are biological macromolecules considered organic?

Answer: Because they contain carbon, along with additional elements that they may contain.

###

Context: Carbohydrates serve various functions in different animals. Arthropods (insects, crustaceans, and others) have an outer skeleton, the exoskeleton, which protects their internal body parts (as we see in the bee in Figure 3.11). This exoskeleton is made of the biological macromolecule chitin, which is a nitrogen-containing polysaccharide.

Target: exoskeleton

Question: Where in insects are structural carbohydrates located?

Answer: in the exoskeleton

(Chpt 3.2 Blooms 1)

(Medium)

Context: Nodes and branches comprise a phylogenetic tree. The internal nodes represent ancestors and are points in evolution when, based on scientific evidence, researchers believe an ancestor has diverged to form two new species.

Target: phylogenetic tree

Question: Where in a phylogenetic tree would you expect to find the organism that had evolved most recently?

Answer: at the branch tips

(Chpt 1.2 Blooms 2)

###

Context: Comparing RNA sequences provided Carl Woese with a sensitive device that revealed the extensive variability of prokaryotes, and which justified separating the prokaryotes into two domains: bacteria and archaea.

Target: RNA

Question: What scientific evidence was used by Carl Woese to determine there should be a separate domain for Archaea?

Answer: a sequence of RNA

(Chpt 1.2 Blooms 3)

###

Context: Most macromolecules are made from single subunits, or building blocks, called monomers. The monomers combine with each other using covalent bonds to form larger molecules known as polymers. In doing so, monomers release water molecules as byproducts. This type of reaction is dehydration synthesis, which means “to put together while losing water.”

Target: Dehydration

Question: Dehydration is a word usually used to mean the removal of water. How does this apply to macromolecules?

Answer: Each monomer releases one water molecule when forming a polymer, thereby causing dehydration.

(Chpt 3.1)

###

Context: Glucose, galactose, and fructose are isomeric monosaccharides (hexoses), meaning they have the same chemical formula but have slightly different structures. Glucose and galactose are aldoses, and fructose is a ketose.

Target: aldose

Question: Identify each sugar as an aldose or ketose.
1. fructose
2. galactose
3. glucose

Answer: Glucose and galactose are aldoses. Fructose is a ketose

(Chpt 3.2 Blooms 3)

###

Context: Carbohydrates contain soluble and insoluble elements. The insoluble part, fiber, is mostly cellulose. Fiber has many uses. It promotes regular bowel movement by adding bulk, and it regulates the blood glucose consumption rate.

Target: Fiber

Question: Fiber is not really a nutrient, because it passes through our body undigested. Why can't fiber be digested and why is it important to our diet?

Answer: The enzymes required to digest cellulose are not produced in the human body; undigested fiber adds bulk to the food easing bowel movements.

(Chpt 3.2 Blooms 4)

###

Context: Plants are able to synthesize glucose, and they store the excess glucose, beyond their immediate energy needs, as starch in different plant parts, including roots and seeds. The starch in the seeds provides food for the embryo as it germinates and can also act as a food source for humans and animals.

Target: starch

Question: At the end of a very productive season, a maple tree has an excess of sugar it has produced from photosynthesis. What is likely to happen to this carbohydrate?

Answer: The sugar will be converted into starch to be stored until the tree needs it.

###

Context: Cholesterol is also the precursor of bile salts, which help emulsifying fats and their subsequent absorption by cells. Although lay people often speak negatively about cholesterol, it is necessary for the body's proper functioning. Sterols (cholesterol in animal cells, phytosterol in plants) are components of the plasma membrane of cells and are found within the phospholipid bilayer.

Target: cholesterol

Question: What type of compound functions in hormone production, contributes to membrane flexibility, and is the starting molecule for bile salts?

Answer: Cholesterol, which is a lipid and also a steroid, functions here.

(Chpt 3.3 Blooms 3)



(Large)

Context: The ratio between carbon-14 and carbon-12 is used for carbon dating. When an organism dies, it is no longer ingesting carbon-14, so the ratio between carbon-14 and carbon-12 will decline.

Target: carbon dating

Question: Based on carbon dating, scientists estimate this pygmy mammoth died 11,000 years ago. How would the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in a living elephant compare to the carbon-14 to carbon-12 ratio found in the mammoth?

Answer: The ratio would be higher in the elephant than the mammoth.

(Chpt 2.1 Blooms 3)

###

Context: Two weak bonds that occur frequently are hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions. Another way to satisfy the octet rule is by sharing electrons between atoms to form covalent bonds. These bonds are stronger and much more common than ionic bonds in the molecules of living organisms.

Target: Hydrogen bonds

Question: The shape of hair proteins is maintained by a combination of hydrogen bonds and covalent, disulfide bonds. Heat is sufficient to break the hydrogen bonds, but harsh chemicals are required to break the disulfide bonds. Why is it harder to break the disulfide bonds than the hydrogen bonds?

Answer: Covalent bonds are stronger than hydrogen bonds.
(Chpt 2.1 Blooms 2)

###

Context: herbivores such as cows, koalas, and buffalos are able, with the help of the specialized flora in their stomach, to digest plant material that is rich in cellulose and use it as a food source. In some of these animals, certain species of bacteria and protists reside in the rumen (part of the herbivore's digestive system) and secrete the enzyme cellulase. The appendix of grazing animals also contains bacteria that digest cellulose, giving it an important role in ruminants' digestive systems. Cellulases can break down cellulose into glucose monomers that animals use as an energy source.

Target: Cellulose

Question: Animals cannot digest cellulose due to the type of bonding between the glucose monomers. The glucose monomers are there for an energy source but are unattainable. Yet ruminants such as cows and sheep, and termites eat cellulose in the form of grasses and wood. How do they do it?

Answer: Specialized bacteria and protists are found in the digestive tracts of these animals making cellulase that result in cellulose breakdown.

(Chpt 3.2 Blooms 4)

###

Context: Glucose, galactose, and fructose are isomeric monosaccharides (hexoses), meaning they have the same chemical formula but have slightly different structures. Glucose and galactose are aldoses, and fructose is a ketose.

Target: isomeric

Question: Glucose, fructose, and galactose are all monosaccharides with the same chemical formula. How is it possible that three different carbohydrates have the same formula, but are very different from each other?

Answer: They are structural isomers, which means they have different arrangements of the atoms.

(Chpt 3.2 Blooms 4)

###

Context: Protein sequencing has shown that there is a considerable amount of cytochrome c amino acid sequence homology among different species. In other words, we can assess evolutionary kinship by measuring the similarities or differences among various species’ DNA or protein sequences.

Target: cytochrome c

Question: The protein sequence of cytochrome c from chimpanzees and humans is identical. The protein sequence of cytochrome c from rhesus monkeys differs from the human sequence by one amino acid. What do these comparisons suggest?

Answer: Chimpanzees are more closely related to humans than rhesus monkeys.

(Chpt 3.4 Blooms 4)

###

Context: In contrast to light microscopes, electron microscopes (Figure 4.2b) use a beam of electrons instead of a beam of light. Not only does this allow for higher magnification and, thus, more detail (Figure 4.3), it also provides higher resolving power. The method to prepare the specimen for viewing with an electron microscope kills the specimen. Electrons have short wavelengths (shorter than photons) that move best in a vacuum, so we cannot view living cells with an electron microscope.

Target: electron microscopes

Question: In light microscopy, the wavelength of visible light determines resolution, which is the ability to distinguish between two points. What leads to increased resolution using an electron microscope?

Answer: the wavelength of the electron

(Chpt 4.1 Blooms 2)

###

Context: Alternatively, when water temperature reduces and water freezes, the water molecules form a crystalline structure maintained by hydrogen bonding (there is not enough energy to break the hydrogen bonds) that makes ice less dense than liquid water, a phenomenon that we do not see when other liquids solidify. Water’s lower density in its solid form is due to the way hydrogen bonds orient as they freeze: the water molecules push farther apart compared to liquid water.

Target: density

Question: When the temperature of liquid water is reduced, water freezes and becomes less dense. This is a property not seen in most other liquids. Ice floats on liquid water because it is less dense. What molecular property of water allows for this phenomenon?

Answer: When water cools, hydrogen bonds form, pushing water molecules apart into a regular crystal structure.

(Chpt 2.2 Blooms 3)
